The first of the two methods, PDDL, can shine with its simplicity.
Where Timefold needs to explicitly define classes with boilerplate constructors, getters and setters for the individual objects in the domain,
PDDL can just list them succinctly as types.

Furthermore, because PDDL defines general blueprints for the facts in the form of predicates and functions,
the planner can dynamically generate the planning entities in the quantities it needs.
This allows for a plan to be generated without having to specify how many of each lesson should appear in the plan.
Timefold on the other hand needs this specification in the problem file.
However, if there is an upper bound constraint in place for the planning entity,
this can be circumvented by having the lesson quantities match or surpass the upper bound, as demonstrated in this exercise.
In projects where the quantities of the planning entities are not known, PDDL is recommended.

Timefold is not all bad though.
It perfectly adheres to the Single Responsibility Principle when it comes to the constraints.
Every constraint is defined in exactly one method.
That is much easier to manage than the preconditions and effects of the usually vast actions in PDDL that the planner can use to reach its goal.
In the case of this timetable scheduling scenario, the precondition and effect predicates representing the constraints are all packed in one action, schedule-course.
Here, Timefold is generally preferable over PDDL when intending to scale larger the project.

Even in the planning approach, PDDL and Timefold differ.

PDDL uses an action-based state-space search,
which means it views the problem as getting from the initial state (zero courses assigned) to the final state, the solution to the plan.
The actions defined in the domain file are the steps it can take to reach the final state.
With that, a decision tree of all possible actions that can be taken in all possible orders is constructed, and the planner uses heuristics to select actions until the goal is reached.
Hard constraints are modeled as preconditions to actions. They strictly cannot be taken if the condition is not fulfilled,
and soft constraints appear in the form of metrics, numbers to optimize as the planner travels through the tree.
So, PDDL returns not just a solution but the path to reach the solution as well, which can be useful depending on the kind of problem.

Timefold on the other hand performs something known as "Heuristic Local Search Optimization".
It starts by constructing an initial, but often incomplete or constraint-violating solution.
Then, the solution is tweaked with a local search until it finds an optimal state where the constraints are satisfied as much as possible.
Hard and soft constraints are represented using scores, one for each constraint type.
Violating constraints drops and satisfying constraints increases the score. The score is then maximized.
It does not return a solution path, making it ideal for problems where the path isn't relevant in the first place.

When it comes to the scale of the initial problem state, the two approaches fare differently.
For bigger planning projects PDDL is not ideal because the decision tree it uses internally grows exponentially with the problem state.
This will result in a much longer runtime of the planner, and can also lead to crashes if the machine runs out of memory.
On the other hand, Timefold does not have this problem because the heuristics and local search it uses are unaffected by the problem state's scale.

The inherent differences in the planners' approaches can be noticed in the context of the returned solutions as well.
PDDL either finds a plan that fulfills all constraints perfectly, or it does not find a plan at all.
Timefold always returns a plan, even with penalties aka imperfections.
